===============
The Big Picture
===============

Maud seeks to facilitate the scientific problem of formulating and solving
kinetic problems in biology. This means using theoretical knowledge, as well as
measurements of cellular processes - mainly metabolomics, protemomics and
fluxomics data - to answer quantitative questions about the mechanisms of
enzymes and how they are regulated.

It's still not completely clear to what extent kinetic problems are solvable
both in abstract terms - i.e. what information is needed in principle - and in
more concrete practical terms, i.e. how accurate must the measurements and
prior information be in order to answer a given question or how powerful a
computer needs to run for how long. Part of the reason for developing Maud is
to help answer these questions of solvability. However we do know that
answering kinetic problems is important.

Why try and solve kinetic problems?
===================================

Homeostasis has lots of timescales, with the fastest cellular responses being
done by allosterism in kinetic systems. All microbial regulation is kinetic and
a lot of mammal regulation.

Failures of enzyme regulation cause many diseases. Conversely, properly
functioning enzyme regulation causes negative feedback loops in metabolic
pathways that might otherwise be viable targets for biosynthesis.

Compared to forms of homeostatic systems with longer timescales, like gene
expression regulation, allosteric regulation is poorly understood. Questions
like why certain enzymes are multimeric, or why they are sub-optimally
catalytic have not yet been answered definitively. In order to improve the
situation kinetic modelling is required.

Kinetic modelling is also likely to be useful for strain design, and for
interpreting metabolomics data. Another useful application is for identifying
bad data, i.e. data that is incompatible with known features of the target
system's kinetics.

More concretely, a dream scenario would be to show that it is possible to
increase the flux in an E. Coli pathway without increasing the total amount of
enzyme by taking into account co-operativity.
